Improve COMPILING, CONTRIBUTING and TRANSLATING files (#2561)
jamulussoftware/jamulus: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Want to contribute some code?

We’d really appreciate your support! In order to keep things organized, please make sure you understand the following.

- If the [Github issue](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/issues) for your feature/bug fix already exists, write a message in that issue saying you want to work on it.
- Otherwise, please [post on the GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/discussions) and say that you are planning to do some coding and explain why. Then we can discuss the specification.

> - To avoid putting lots of work into something which may not get accepted later, please start coding after we have agreed to a specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To avoid putting lots of work into something which may not get accepted later, please only start coding after we have agreed to a specification.
```

## Jamulus project/source code general principles

### 1. Stability

Stability has been, and must continue to be, the most important requirement. In particular, instabilities during live performances such as WorldJam are not acceptable. The following principles are designed to support this.

### 2. [Keep it Simple and Stupid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle) and 3. [Do One Thing and Do It Well](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy#Do_One_Thing_and_Do_It_Well)

> If a feature or function can be achieved in another way by another system or method, then that is preferable instead of building that feature into Jamulus. Consider having a look at e.g. the [JSON-RPC](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/docs/JSON-RPC.md) API which allows you to communicate with the client and server from the outside.

Reviewer: This is a rather quick jump from something generic to something specific.

```suggestion
If a feature or function can be achieved in another way by another system or method, then that is preferable instead of building that feature into Jamulus. Instead of implementing each and every feature as part of Jamulus, we focus on a stable core and implement interfaces for interaction with third-party components as necessary. One example is the [JSON-RPC](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/docs/JSON-RPC.md) API which allows you to communicate with the client and server from the outside.
```

### Source code consistency

Our CI will fail and tell you about styling violations.

> To keep a consistent coding style, please install `clang-format` on your PC and run it before committing.

Author: ```suggestion
To keep a consistent coding style, please install `clang-format` on your PC and run it before committing. Preferably, you should use the version we use to verify the style in our CI [(see our coding-style-check file and search for the `clangFormatVersion`)](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/.github/workflows/coding-style-check.yml#L20).
```

There are multiple ways to run clang-format:

- Use your editor's or IDE's clang-format support to accomplish that.
- Via make: after running `qmake Jamulus.pro`, run `make clang_format`
- Manually: run `clang-format -i <path/to/changed/files>`

> 

Reviewer: I think we should specify where to find the clang-format version which we use in CI (maybe not hardcode the version here though).
#2559 + related for context.

Author: Probably yes? But a link to the CI (+ comment) would maybe help for less maintenance burden...

Author: Added a suggestion.

#### Style definition

Please see the [.clang_format file](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/.clang-format) in the root folder. In short:

- Respect the existing code style: Tab size=4, insert spaces.

> - Space before and after `(` and `)`, except no space between `)` and `;`, and no space before an empty `()`.
> - All bodies of `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, etc., to be enclosed in braces `{` and `}`, on separate lines.

Reviewer: The first item is imperative, those are not. Adjust?
```suggestion
- Add a space before and after `(` and `)`. Don't add a space between `)` and `;` or before an empty `()`.
- Enclose all bodies of `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, etc. in braces `{` and `}`, on separate lines.
```

### Supported platforms

We support the following platforms and versions:

- Windows 7 or higher
- macOS 10.10 or higher
- Ubuntu 18.04 or later, Debian 10 or later, most Linux flavors with recent enough Qt versions

Android and iOS are not officially supported, however, please ensure not to break their build.

> Please try to avoid breaking any of them by introducing platform-specific code. Check to see if any newly introduced Qt calls are available in the minimum supported Qt version, which is currently 5.9. Note that code _style_ in a file may be Qt 4.x, and while you should normally stick to existing style if making large-scale changes, then updating to Qt 5.9 style is encouraged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please try to avoid breaking any of them by introducing platform-specific code. Check to see if any newly introduced Qt calls, parameters, properties or constants are available in the minimum supported Qt version, which is currently 5.9. Note that code _style_ in a file may be Qt 4.x, and while you should normally stick to existing style if making large-scale changes, then updating to Qt 5.9 style is encouraged.
```

cc @pgScorpio @ann0see https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/discussions/2572#discussioncomment-2488591

Reviewer 2: Hmmm "any newly introduced ... are available in the  minimum supported Qt version" sounds a bit strange to me....

Shouldn't it be: "Do not use any new Qt functionality like components, functions, properties or property values that are introduced after the minimum supported Qt version, which is currently 5.9" ??

# Want to contribute some code?

> We’d really appreciate your support! In order to keep things organized, please make sure you understand the following.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We’d really appreciate your support! In order to keep things organised, please make sure you understand the following.
```
UK spelling.

# Contributing to Jamulus

We’d really appreciate your support! Please ensure that you understand the following in order to keep things organized:

- If a [Github issue](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/issues) for your feature/bug fix already exists, write a message in that issue indicating that you want to work on it.

- Otherwise, please [post on the GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/discussions) and say that you are planning to do some coding and explain why. Then we can discuss the specification.
- Please begin coding only after we have agreed on a specification to avoid putting a lot of effort into something that may not be accepted later.

## Jamulus project/source code general principles

### 1. Stability

Instabilities during live performances such as WorldJam are not acceptable. As a result, stability has been, and must continue to be the most important requirement. The following principles are designed to support this.

### 2. [Keep it Simple and Stupid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle) and 3. [Do One Thing and Do It Well](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy#Do_One_Thing_and_Do_It_Well)

> If a feature or function can be accomplished in another way by another system or method, it is preferable not to build that feature into Jamulus. Rather than of implementing each and every feature as part of Jamulus, we concentrate on a stable core and implement interfaces for interaction with third-party components as needed. The [JSON-RPC](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/docs/JSON-RPC.md) API for example, allows you to communicate with the client and server from outside the application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a feature or function can be accomplished in another way by another system or method, it is preferable not to build that feature into Jamulus. Rather than implementing each and every feature as part of Jamulus, we concentrate on a stable core and implement interfaces for interaction with third-party components as needed. The [JSON-RPC](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/docs/JSON-RPC.md) API for example, allows you to communicate with the client and server from outside the application.
```

### User experience

Jamulus is used by people all over the world with different backgrounds and knowledge. Therefore, think user focused.

- Features should be usable in the sense that they act as expected to somebody who does not have a technical background.
- Make sure you follow the [style and tone guide](https://jamulus.io/contribute/Style-and-Tone) to remain consistent.

### Submitting code

- Create a Github fork of the Jamulus code and create a Pull Request when you are done. Please don't use diff/patch to send your code changes. GitHub can be confusing, so feel free to ask for help.

> - Please run a local (build/feature) test to ensure there are no errors. After opening a pull request, keep an eye on the CI checks for quality or compile issues and fix them as required.

Reviewer: Just an idea (not sure if a good one): We could also point people to using a `autobuild/foo` branch name and check their own repo's Actions before submitting the PR (instead of or in addition to building locally).
Note though that Workflows have to be enabled manually after forking (I think it's possible right via the Actions tab).

Author: I'd prefer not to write another "how to contribute to GitHub projects" file. This would make the problem even worse in my opinion (due to even more clutter around the web). Maybe just put a comment about the autobuild/ branching here.

Author: ```suggestion
- Please run a local (build/feature) test to ensure there are no errors. After opening a pull request, keep an eye on the CI checks for quality or compile issues and fix them as required. You can also test the build on your repository by naming your branch `autobuild/<branchName>` to invoke the building process on your repo.
```

#### Updating a PR/fixing conflicts

> If there are conflicts with jamulussoftware/jamulus showing when you raise your pull request or are requested to "rebase" your work, do so as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are conflicts with jamulussoftware/jamulus showing when you raise your pull request or if you are requested to "rebase" your work, do so as follows:
```

```shell
git checkout master ;# checkout your local master

> git pull upstream master --tags ;# refresh from jamulussoftware/jamulus (i.e. use your upstream remote name. If you haven't set it up yet, add it via 'git remote add upstream git@github.com:jamulussoftware/jamulus')

Reviewer: This only works when a remote with the name `upstream` has been created. This isn't explained anywhere in this document, as far as I can see?
(I'm well aware that this part is not new in this PR and has just been moved around...)

Author: This PR is a general one, so improvement is good. 
Adding another line should be enough.

Author: Ok. Please see the last change

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks.

git push --tags --force ;# update your fork's master
git checkout - ;# back to your working branch

> git rebase master ;# replay your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed)

Reviewer: Fixing conflicts might not be trivial. Is there some good external ressource we could link here?

Author: #2558 and pgScorpio's comment?

Author: @pgScorpio which one helped most in your opinion?

### User experience

Jamulus is used by people all over the world with different backgrounds and knowledge. Therefore, think user focused.

- Features should be usable in the sense that they act as expected to somebody who does not have a technical background.
- Make sure you follow the [style and tone guide](https://jamulus.io/contribute/Style-and-Tone) to remain consistent.

### Submitting code

> - Create a Github fork of the Jamulus code and create a Pull Request when you are done. Please don't use diff/patch to send your code changes. GitHub can be confusing, so feel free to ask for help.

Author: Added something similar.

- Please run a local (build/feature) test to ensure there are no errors. After opening a pull request, keep an eye on the CI checks for quality or compile issues and fix them as required.

#### Updating a PR/fixing conflicts

If there are conflicts with jamulussoftware/jamulus showing when you raise your pull request or if you are requested to (rebase)[https://teamairship.com/update-outdated-branch-without-creating-merge-commit/] your work, do so as follows:

```shell

> git remote add upstream git@github.com:jamulussoftware/jamulus ;# add the main repo as upstream remote if you didn’t  before already to get the latest code

Author: ```suggestion
git remote add upstream git@github.com:jamulussoftware/jamulus ;# add the main repo as upstream remote if you didn’t before already to get the latest code
```

git fetch upstream ; # Get the latest changes from the main upstream repo you added before (if needed)
git checkout <theBranchYourWorkIsOn> ;# switch to (= checkout) the branch you want to rebase

> git rebase -i upstream/master ;# replay (=rebase) your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed)

Reviewer: I don't think a `remote/` prefix exists by default, does it?
`upstream/master` refers to the local copy of the `master` branch which has been fetched from the git remote named `upstream`.
I don't think there's a way to direectly rebase a remote branch. You always rebase locally and can then update a remote branch by pushing to it.

> git rebase -i upstream/master ;# replay (=rebase) your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed)

Reviewer 2: As far as I know just `git rebase -i ` rebases against remote/master and doing a `git rebase -i upstream/master` without rebasing remote/master first might cause extra conflicts later on...

So it should be safer to do a `git pull --rebase upstream master` which rebases remote/master with upstream/master and then rebasing remote/branch with remote/master using just `git rebase -i` isn't it ?

- Avoid submitting code from your master or main branch. This will confuse you. Instead create a feature branch on your repo via `git checkout -b feature/<insertNameOfFeatureHere>` and apply your changes there. For help on branches [see the Git book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Branching-Basic-Branching-and-Merging).
- Please run a local (build/feature) test to ensure there are no errors. After opening a pull request, keep an eye on the CI checks for quality or compile issues and fix them as required. You can also test the build on your repository by naming your branch `autobuild/<branchName>` to invoke the building process on your repo.

#### Updating a PR/fixing conflicts

If there are conflicts with jamulussoftware/jamulus showing when you raise your pull request or if you are requested to (rebase)[https://teamairship.com/update-outdated-branch-without-creating-merge-commit/] your work, do so as follows:

```shell
git remote add upstream git@github.com:jamulussoftware/jamulus ;# add the main repo as upstream remote if you didn’t before already to get the latest code

> git checkout master ;# checkout your local master
> git pull upstream master --tags ;# refresh from jamulussoftware/jamulus (i.e. the main repository)
> git push --tags --force ;# update your fork's master
> git checkout - ;# back to your working branch
> git rebase master ;# replay your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed)

Author: ```suggestion
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/master ;# replay your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed. Afterwards continue:)
git rebase --continue
git push --force
```

Author: Would that be ok?

Reviewer 2: > Would that be ok?

Definitely better than the original, but I like to keep my origin master in sync with upstream too, so I can rebase against origin (A few steps more, but I think this gives less chances on problems.). Also I like to use `git push --force-with-lease` on my branches to make sure I'm not messing things up.
So that would be:

```
# Update origin/master:
git fetch upstream
git checkout master
git reset --hard upstream/master  
git push origin master --force
```
After that you can do:
```
# Rebase your branch(es):
git checkout <theBranchYourWorkIsOn>
git rebase -i origin/master   # This should now be the same as git rebase -i upstream/master, but I'm sure origin did not change, while upstream can have changed in between when I rebase multiple branches.
...                           # Solve conflicts when neccesary...
git rebase --continue
git push --force_with_lease

```

Author: Yes, but I'd not like to "force" the user to update the master branch. Wasn't that what confused you at the beginning?

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what caused all my initial problems... But still I think we should advise the safest way, not the easiest...

Author: Safest = not modifying master at all (people might work on master which will start to get confusing)

Reviewer: > Would that be ok?

- Why is `-i` necessary for `rebase` here?
- `git push --force` could be made a bit safer. `git push` behavior without refs depends on the git version and the specific config. `git push origin <theBranchYourWorkIsOn>` might be better. I'm a bit torn about `--force` vs. `--force-with-lease`. In general, I'd really prefer the latter, but it is only available in newer git versions and an author might rather want to deliberately overwrite their remote branch even if it was not fetched recently. So I guess I'd keep `--force`.

Author: `-i` isn't necessary. But maybe good if we tell the user to squash commits?

Reviewer: Well but that would need more instructions on what to do anyway, so maybe keep it simpler here and go without `-i`?

Author: ```suggestion
git fetch upstream ; # Get the latest changes from the main upstream repo you added before (if needed)
git checkout <theBranchYourWorkIsOn> ;# switch to (= checkout) the branch you want to rebase
git rebase upstream/master ;# replay (=rebase) your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed)
git rebase --continue # to continue the rebasing progress after having fixed the conflicts
git push --force # Push the changes to your repo
```

### User experience

Jamulus is used by people all over the world with different backgrounds and knowledge. Features should be usable in the sense that they act as expected to somebody who does not have a technical background.

Language wise, follow the [style and tone guide](https://jamulus.io/contribute/Style-and-Tone) to remain consistent. UI wise, prefer standard approaches to exotic ones.

### Submitting code

> - Create a Github fork of the Jamulus code and create a pull request from that fork when you are done. Please don't use diff/patch to send your code changes. GitHub can be confusing, so feel free to ask for help. The [git-scm book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) might be a good reference to get used to git.

Reviewer 4: This should mention _branching_ on the fork, too.  PRs from `master` on the fork are... not great.

Author: What would you put here exactly?

Reviewer 2: Create a Github fork of the Jamulus code and in that fork create a branch for your work. You can create a pull request from that branch when you are done. Please don't code on the master branch and don't use diff/patch to send your code changes. GitHub can be confusing, so feel free to ask for help.

Reviewer 3: BTW, is this PR starting to overlap with information about using git, branching, etc. in [TRANSLATING.md](https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/blob/master/docs/TRANSLATING.md)? Might want to check that anything we say there isn't contradicting what we say here. Ideally, we'd only say things in one place...

Author: Hmm. Yes. This would mean TRANSLATING.md should link to this file for rebasing

Reviewer 4: Or have a common "Using Github" include?

Author: > Or have a common "Using Github" include?

I doubt the docs in the repo support that. Just the website supports includes

Reviewer 2: You always can include the html url, most modern text editors/viewers do support opening html links.

Author: Let's expand the TRANSLATING.md file, remove all or most git related stuff from CONTRIBUTING.md and add a link.

Reviewer 2: >  "Using Github" include?

a USING_GITHUB.md ?

Author: I'd be a bit worried about an explicit file named like that since it might imply being another GitHub tutorial.

### User experience

> Jamulus is used by people all over the world with different backgrounds and knowledge. Therefore, think user focused.

Reviewer 3: This is rather vapid. What are we trying to say, exactly?

Author: Something like ensure that the app is usable by people who don't know computers well. 
Sorry for the stereotypical image here:
Ensure the feature is usable by a person born without having grown up with computers (I.e. (great) grand father)

Reviewer 3: That's pretty much what we're saying in the next paragraph with "Features should be usable... somebody who does not have a technical background." 

Maybe just combine them into one para?

"People from all over the world and with different levels of knowledge use Jamulus. Features should be usable in the sense that they act as expected to somebody who does not have a technical background."

Author: Ok. Updated this part slightly.

- Features should be usable in the sense that they act as expected to somebody who does not have a technical background.
- Make sure you follow the [style and tone guide](https://jamulus.io/contribute/Style-and-Tone) to remain consistent.

### Submitting code

> - Create a Github fork of the Jamulus code and create a Pull Request from that fork when you are done. Please don't use diff/patch to send your code changes. GitHub can be confusing, so feel free to ask for help. The [git-scm book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) might be a good reference to get used to git.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Create a Github fork of the Jamulus code and create a pull request from that fork when you are done. Please don't use diff/patch to send your code changes. GitHub can be confusing, so feel free to ask for help. The [git-scm book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) might be a good reference to get used to git.
```

```shell
git remote add upstream git@github.com:jamulussoftware/jamulus ;# add the main repo as upstream remote if you didn’t before already to get the latest code
git fetch upstream ; # Get the latest changes from the main upstream repo you added before (if needed)
git checkout <theBranchYourWorkIsOn> ;# switch to (= checkout) the branch you want to rebase

> git rebase -i upstream/master ;# replay (=rebase) your changes onto the latest code (and fix conflicts if needed)

Author: Ok. Changed.

@hoffie @pgScorpio is this ok?

Reviewer 2: > Not sure what the downsides of using git fetch

As far as I understand git fetch only gets the meta data, git pull gets all actual changes too.

> We should really try to document the simplest method here

I think we should document the **safest** method here, with minimal chance on conflicts/errors.

> git is powerful, but can also be tricky and we shouldn't write yet another generic git tutorial. :)

I totally agree, git can be very confusing and a lot of existing tutorials use different methods, and many of these methods are considered to be 'unsafe' in many discussions on the internet... So hard to tell which is better and very confusing for a newbie on git like me. So I think we should decide which is the best available tutorial and link to that one. (Though I still have no idea which one would be the best.)

Reviewer: > As far as I understand git fetch only gets the meta data, git pull gets all actual changes too.

Most importantly, `git fetch` downloads the required objects. `git pull` does the same, but additionally modifiers your current branch by merging or rebasing, depending on the command line arguments. That doesn't sound like a downside per-se to me. :)

> I think we should document the safest method here, with minimal chance on conflicts/errors.

Yes.

### Documentation/Acknowledgements

Each new feature or bug fix must be documented in the ChangeLog. Please provide a single-sentence suggestion for that as part of your pull request description after the `CHANGELOG: ` line. Do not modify the ChangeLog file as part of your PR as it will lead to conflicts.

> If you are a first-time contributor/translator, please add yourself to the contributor/translator list in the About dialog of the Jamulus software (see in `src/util.cpp` in the constructor function `CAboutDlg::CAboutDlg()`).

Reviewer: I think we had thought about doing that at some point already. There are manual steps though, so I'm not sure if it's worth it without having to put in additional manual work anyway:
- Some people seemingly only wanted to be mentioned by their Github account, not by their real name (independent of what's in their profile)
- Some people added their real names although they did not have them on their Github account page

> If you are a first-time contributor/translator, please add yourself to the contributor/translator list in the About dialog of the Jamulus software (see in `src/util.cpp` in the constructor function `CAboutDlg::CAboutDlg()`).

Reviewer 2: OK, I can understand those considerations, but still I think it should be a check in the release process, automated or manual, and so having the contributors in a separate include file would still be handy.

Having contributors mentioned in the release document but not in the about dialog just seems a bit strange to me....

> If you are a first-time contributor/translator, please add yourself to the contributor/translator list in the About dialog of the Jamulus software (see in `src/util.cpp` in the constructor function `CAboutDlg::CAboutDlg()`).

Reviewer: > but still I think it should be a check in the release process, automated or manual, and so having the contributors in a separate include file would still be handy.

I'm not opposed to extracting the list, it's just that other stuff had higher priority for me (and maybe others).

> Having contributors mentioned in the release document but not in the about dialog just seems a bit strange to me....

Well, the Changelog focuses on crediting people who helped with things which changed/improved compared to the previous release. This sometimes covers bug reporters and testers as well.

The UI authors list is a permanent list which mainly covers code contributors (+ translators, docs/websites).

> If you are a first-time contributor/translator, please add yourself to the contributor/translator list in the About dialog of the Jamulus software (see in `src/util.cpp` in the constructor function `CAboutDlg::CAboutDlg()`).

Author: @pgScorpio see https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamulus/issues/2271

### Documentation/Acknowledgements

> Each new feature or bug fix must be documented in the ChangeLog. Please provide a single-sentence suggestion for that as part of your pull request description after the `CHANGELOG: ` line. Do not modify the ChangeLog file as part of your PR as it will lead to conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each new feature or bug fix must be documented in the ChangeLog. Please provide a single-sentence suggestion for that as part of your pull request description after the `CHANGELOG: ` keyword. Do not modify the ChangeLog file as part of your PR as it will lead to conflicts.
```

Minor nit: The description must be in the same line as the script fails to catch it otherwise.
